doc: Postgres direct source integration guides (#19453)
MaterializeInc/materialize: doc/user/content/connect-sources/postgres-amazon-rds.md

  You'll use `psql` to interact with your PostgreSQL database and Materialize.

- Make sure there are no schema changes planned or in progress on the tables that you want to replicate.

  If Materialize detects a schema change on a table it is replicating, Materialize will [log an error](/manage/troubleshooting/#why-isnt-my-source-ingesting-data) and stop all replication from the PostgreSQL database. To handle schema changes, you will need to redo the integration. [TODO: SECTION ON THIS PAGE TO GUIDE THROUGH THAT, OR A SEPARATE PAGE?]

## Step 1. Enable logical replication

Materialize uses PostgreSQL's [logical replication](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/10/logical-replication.html) protocol to track changes in your datatabase and propogate them to Materialize.

As a first step, you need to make sure logical replication is enabled.

1. As a user with the role `rds_superuser`, connect `psql` to your database and check if logical replication is enabled:

    ``` sql
    SELECT name,setting
      FROM pg_settings
      WHERE name = 'rds.logical_replication';
    ```

    If logical replication is already on, skip to [Step 2](#step-2-create-a-publication):

>     ``` noftmt

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    ``` nofmt
```

Author: Done.

            name             | setting
    -------------------------+---------
    rds.logical_replication  | on
    (1 row)
    ```

    If logical replication is off, continue to the next step:

>     ``` noftm

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    ```nofmt
```

Author: Done.

            name             | setting
    -------------------------+---------
    rds.logical_replication  | off
    (1 row)
    ```

1. [Create a custom RDS parameter group](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonRDS/latest/UserGuide/USER_WorkingWithDBInstanceParamGroups.html#USER_WorkingWithParamGroups.Creating).

>     Be sure to set **Parameter group family** to your Postgres version and **Type** to **DB Parameter Group**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Set **Parameter group family** to your Postgres version and **Type** to **DB Parameter Group**.
```

Author: Done.

1. Edit the new parameter group and set the `rds.logical_replication` parameter to `1`.

1. [Associate the RDS parameter group to your database](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonRDS/latest/UserGuide/USER_WorkingWithDBInstanceParamGroups.html#USER_WorkingWithParamGroups.Associating).

>     Be sure to use the **Apply Immediately** option. The database must be rebooted in order for the parameter group association to take effect.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Use the **Apply Immediately** option. The database must be rebooted in order for the parameter group association to take effect.
```

Author: Done.

    Do not move on to the next step until the database **Status** is **Available** in the RDS Console.

1. Back in your `psql` shell, verify that replication is now enabled:

    ``` sql
    SELECT name,setting
      FROM pg_settings
      WHERE name = 'rds.logical_replication';
    ```

>     ``` noftm

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    ```nofmt
```

            name             | setting
    -------------------------+---------
    rds.logical_replication  | on
    (1 row)
    ```

    If replication is still not enabled, [reboot the database](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonRDS/latest/UserGuide/USER_RebootInstance.html).

## Step 2. Create a publication

Once logical replication is enabled, the next step is to create a publication with the tables that you want to replicate to Materialize. You'll also need create a user for Materialize and give the user permissions to manage replication.

1. For each table that you want to replicate to Materialize, set the [replica identity](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/sql-altertable.html#SQL-ALTERTABLE-REPLICA-IDENTITY) to `FULL`:

    ```sql
    ALTER TABLE table1 REPLICA IDENTITY FULL;
    ```

>     This setting makes sure sufficient information is written to the replication stream for  `UPDATE` and `DELETE` operations.

Reviewer: Same here, not sure what sufficient information means and if there is specific data this requires or it refers to the amount of data.

1. Create a [publication](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/logical-replication-publication.html) with the tables you want to replicate:

    _For specific tables:_

    ```sql
    CREATE PUBLICATION mz_source FOR TABLE table1, table2;
    ```

    _For all tables in the database:_

    ```sql
    CREATE PUBLICATION mz_source FOR ALL TABLES;
    ```

    The `mz_source` publication will contain the set of change events generated from the specified tables, and will later be used to ingest the replication stream.

    We strongly recommend that you **limit** publications only to the tables you need.

1. Create a user for Materialize:

    ``` sql
    CREATE USER materialize PASSWORD '<password>';
    ```

1. Grant the user permission to manage replication:

    ``` sql
    GRANT rds_replication TO materialize;
    ```

1. Grant the user the required permissions on the tables you want to replicate:

    ```sql
    GRANT CONNECT ON DATABASE <dbname> TO materialize;
    ```

    ```sql
    GRANT USAGE ON SCHEMA <schema> TO materialize;
    ```

    ```sql
    GRANT SELECT ON ALL TABLES IN SCHEMA <schema> TO materialize;
    ```

>     **Note:** `SELECT` privileges on the tables you want to replicate are needed for the initial snapshot.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    **Note:** You must enable `SELECT` privileges on the tables you want to replicate for the initial snapshot.
```

## Step 3. Configure your network

When your PostgreSQL database is running in a private network, there are various ways to allow Materialize to connect:

> - **Allow Materialize IPs:** This is the simplest approach. You configure your database's security group to allow public connections from a set of static Materialize IP addresses and rely on PostgreSQL authentication and authorization to keep your data safe.

Author: Done.

> - **Use AWS PrivateLink** or **Use an SSH tunnel:** If you need an additional layer of security at the network level, you can use either [AWS PrivateLink](https://aws.amazon.com/privatelink/) or an SSH tunnel to give Materialize secure access to your database.

Reviewer 2: The phrasing here is weird. It's not about adding an additional layer of security or give Materialize secure access, but more about being able to connect to your database if it's in a private network.

Author: Done. I've removed mention of levels of security for now. @josharenberg, since you gave me some help on that language, let me know if you think it's particularly important.

Reviewer 3: From a cloud security perspective, the `Allow Materialize IPs` is the least secure of these options, which may be what the phrasing is hinting at. Some infra teams will not be ok with allowlisting IPs. However, this option would not work unless the database is [already in a public subnet and publicly accessible](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonRDS/latest/UserGuide/USER_VPC.WorkingWithRDSInstanceinaVPC.html#USER_VPC.IP_addressing), so it might make more sense just to include those prerequisites in the option rather than mentioning security. Presumably a cloud team that is running their database as publicly accessible has already considered the security tradeoff!
Perhaps:
>- **Allow Materialize IPs:** This is the simplest approach, but requires that your database is configured as publicly accessible.

Author: Rephrased.

Select the option that works best for you.

{{< tabs >}}

{{< tab "Allow Materialize IPs">}}

> 1. Connect `psql` to Materialize.

Author: I'm listing `psql` as a prereq because its a lot easier to assume one client. But I should clarify that other SQL clients can be used.

    You can find your `psql` connection command on the **Connect** screen in the [Materialize UI](https://console.materialize.com/).

1. Find your static egress IP addresses:

    ```sql
    SELECT * FROM mz_egress_ips;
    ```
1. In the RDS Console, [add an inbound rule](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSEC2/latest/UserGuide/working-with-security-groups.html#adding-security-group-rule) to your database's security group:

    Type | Protocol | Port range | Source
    -----|----------|------------|-------

>     Custom TCP | TCP | `5432` | IP address from the previous step

Reviewer 3: I think we should recommend the PostgreSQL Type, which will auto-set the other fields:

 | Type | Protocol | Port range | Source
 | ---|---|---|---
 |  PostgreSQL | TCP | `5432` | IP address from the previous step as a CIDR

--
>In the RDS Console, [add an inbound rule](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSEC2/latest/UserGuide/working-with-security-groups.html#adding-security-group-rule)

At time of writing there will be 4 IPs that they need to add inbound security rules for.

Might also be worth noting that the AWS console will auto-convert the IPs to CIDRs which is what the security rule actually needs. If they're doing this some other way they may need to do that themselves.

Reviewer 4: nit: I'd inverted this table so its columns are its rows:

```
Field | Value
------|-------
Type  | PostgreSQL
...
```

{{< /tab >}}

{{< tab "Use PrivateLink">}}
{{< /tab >}}

{{< tab "Use an SSH tunnel">}}
{{< /tab >}}

{{< /tabs >}}

> ## Step 4. Create an ingestion cluster

Reviewer 5: I just want to say, I'm really glad we are going ingest cluster first in the guide.

In Materialize, a [cluster](/get-started/key-concepts/#clusters) is an **isolated environment**, similar to a virtual warehouse in Snowflake. Within a cluster, you have [replicas](/get-started/key-concepts/#cluster-replicas), which are the **physical resources** for doing computational work. Clusters are completely isolated from each other, so replicas can be sized based on the specific task of the cluster, whether that is ingesting data from a source, computing always-up-to-date query results, serving results to clients, or a combination.

In this case, you'll create 1 new cluster containing 1 replica for ingesting source data from your PostgreSQL database.

> 1. Connect `psql` to Materialize.

Reviewer 2: Same here, users can connect from whatever client they're using.

    You can find your `psql` connection command on the **Connect** screen in the [Materialize UI](https://console.materialize.com/).

1. Use the [`CREATE CLUSTER`](/sql/create-cluster/) command to create the new cluster and replica:

    ```sql
    CREATE CLUSTER ingest_rds_postgres REPLICAS (r1 (SIZE = 'medium'));
    ```

>     At first, it's recommended to use a `medium` [size](/sql/create-cluster-replica/#sizes) replica or larger. This will help Materialize more quickly take an initial snapshot of the tables in your publication. Once the snapshot is finished, you'll right-size the cluster replica.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    We recommend using a `medium` [size](/sql/create-cluster-replica/#sizes) replica or larger to start. This will help Materialize more quickly take an initial snapshot of the tables in your publication. Once the snapshot is finished, you'll right-size the cluster replica.
```

> 1. Use the [`SHOW CLUSTER REPLICAS`](/sql/show-cluster-replicas/) command to check the status of the replica:

Reviewer 5: Should we skip this step? You can create the source before the replica is ready, and Materialize is smart enough to wait for the replica to come online before attempting to ingest data.

    ```sql
    SHOW CLUSTER REPLICAS WHERE cluster = 'ingest_rds_postgres';
    ```
    <p></p>

>     ```noftm

Reviewer 3: `nofmt`?

           cluster       | replica |  size  | ready
    ---------------------+---------+--------+-------
     ingest_rds_postgres | r1      | medium | t
    (1 row)
    ```

    Once the replica is ready (`ready=t`), move on to the next step.

## Step 5. Start ingesting data

> With your database network configured and your source cluster created in Materialize, you can now connect Materialize to your PostgreSQL database and start ingesting data. The exact steps depend on your networking configuration, so start by selecting the relevant option.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now that you configured your database network and created a source cluster, you need to connect Materialize to your PostgreSQL database and start ingesting data. The exact steps depend on your networking configuration, so start by selecting the relevant option.
```

{{< tabs >}}

{{< tab "Allow Materialize IPs">}}

> 1. In [step 2](#step-2-create-a-publication), you created a `materialize` user in your PostgreSQL database. Use the [`CREATE SECRET`](/sql/create-secret/) command to store this user's password as a secrete in Materialize:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. In [step 2](#step-2-create-a-publication), you created a `materialize` user in your PostgreSQL database. Use the [`CREATE SECRET`](/sql/create-secret/) command to store this user's password as a secret in Materialize:
```

    ```sql
    CREATE SECRET pgpass AS '<PASSWORD>';
    ```

1. Use the [`CREATE CONNECTION`](/sql/create-connection/) command to create a connection object with access and authentication details for Materialize to use:

    ```sql
    CREATE CONNECTION pg_connection TO POSTGRES (
      HOST '<host>',
      PORT 5432,
      USER 'materialize',
      PASSWORD SECRET pgpass,
      SSL MODE 'require',
      DATABASE '<database>'
      );
    ```

    Replace `<host>` with the your RDS endpoint. To find your RDS endpoint, select your database in the RDS Console, and look under **Connectivity & security**.

    Replace `<database>` with the name of the database containing the tables you want to replicate to Materialize.

> 1. Use the [`CREATE SOURCE`](/sql/create-source/) command to connect Materialize to your PostgreSQL database and start ingesting data from the publication you created in PostgreSQL earlier:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Use the [`CREATE SOURCE`](/sql/create-source/) command to connect Materialize to your RDS instance and start ingesting data from the publication you created earlier:
```

    ```sql
    CREATE SOURCE mz_source
      IN CLUSTER ingest_rds_postgres
      FROM POSTGRES CONNECTION pg_connection (PUBLICATION 'mz_source')
      FOR ALL TABLES;
    ```

>     To ingest data from specific schemas or tables in your publication, change `FOR ALL TABLES` to `FOR SCHEMAS (<schema1>,<schema2>)` or `FOR TABLES (<table1>, <table2>)`, respectively.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    To ingest data from specific schemas or tables in your publication, use `FOR SCHEMAS (<schema1>,<schema2>)` or `FOR TABLES (<table1>, <table2>)` instead of `FOR ALL TABLES`, respectively.
```

{{< /tab >}}

{{< tab "Use PrivateLink">}}

TBD

{{< /tab >}}

{{< tab "Use an SSH tunnel">}}

TBD

{{< /tab >}}

{{< /tabs >}}

## Step 6. Check the ingestion status

> At first, Materialize takes a snapshot of the relevant tables in your publication. This snapshotting process must finish before Materialize can start ingesting change events and before you can be certain that Materialize has the same view of your data as your PostgreSQL database.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Before it starts consuming the replication stream, Materialize takes a snapshot of the current state of your database for the relevant tables in the publication. Until this snapshot is complete, you won't see any data in the replicated subsources.
```

In this step, you'll first verify that the source is running and then check the status of the snapshotting process.

1. Back in the `psql` shell connected to Materialize, use the [`mz_sources`](/sql/system-catalog/mz_catalog/#mz_sources) table to find the ID of your source:

    ```sql
    SELECT id FROM mz_sources WHERE name = 'mz_source';
    ```

1. Use the [`mz_source_statuses`](/sql/system-catalog/mz_internal/#mz_source_statuses) table to check the overall status of your source:

    ```sql
    SELECT * FROM mz_internal.mz_source_statuses
    WHERE id = '<source_ID>';
    ```

    <p></p>

    ```nofmt
     id  |   name    |   type   |  last_status_change_at   | status  | error | details
    -----+-----------+----------+--------------------------+---------+-------+---------
     u61 | mz_source | postgres | 2023-05-24 18:12:35.7+00 | running |       |
    (1 row)

>     ```

Reviewer 2: This would ideally be a single step:

```sql
SELECT s.id, 
       s.name, 
       s.type, 
       status, 
       error, 
       details, 
       last_status_change_at 
FROM mz_sources s 
JOIN mz_internal.mz_source_statuses ss ON s.id = ss.id;
```

Reviewer 2: Subsources can now error independently of the actual source (after #18539), so it's also more useful to look at source+subsources.

Reviewer 2: The annoyance is that there might be a gazillion sources in a user's region, but then we could maybe add an `ORDER BY s.id ASC` clause.

Reviewer 4: We annoyingly don't have a great view of which source a subsource belongs to. Filed #19534

Reviewer 4: Once #19537 lands, you'll be able to just use this:

```sql
SELECT *
FROM mz_internal.mz_source_statuses
WHERE id =
  ANY (
    SELECT
      -- The conversion to an array is required because we
      -- don't yet support concatenating a non-array to an
      -- array
      unnest(subsources || ARRAY[id])
    FROM
      mz_sources
    WHERE
      name = '<SOURCE NAME>'
  );
```

Reviewer 4: This can actually be done with existing features:

```sql
WITH
  source_id AS
  (SELECT id FROM mz_objects WHERE name = '<SOURCE NAME>')
SELECT *
FROM
  mz_internal.mz_source_statuses
    JOIN
      (
          SELECT referenced_object_id
          FROM mz_internal.mz_object_dependencies
          WHERE
            object_id
            = (SELECT id FROM source_id)
          UNION SELECT id FROM source_id
        )
        AS sources
      ON mz_source_statuses.id
      = sources.referenced_object_id;
```

A little annoyingly, users will have to look past the progress subsource collection to see the values they want; think maybe we ought to change the labeling of that from `subsource` to `progress`.

    If `status` is `running`, move on to the next step.

>     However, if `status` is `stalled` or `failed`, there's likely a configuration issue for you to fix. Check the `error` field for details and fix the issue before moving on. Also, if `status` is `starting` for more than a few minutes, [contact support](/support/).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    However, if `status` is `stalled` or `failed`, there's likely a configuration issue for you to fix. Check the `error` field for details and fix the issue before moving on. Also, if `status` is `starting` for more than a few minutes, [contact our team for support](/support/).
```

> 2. Once you know the source is running, use the [`mz_source_statistics`](/sql/system-catalog/mz_internal/#mz_source_statistics) table to check the status of the initial snapshot:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Once the source is running, use the [`mz_source_statistics`](/sql/system-catalog/mz_internal/#mz_source_statistics) table to check the status of the initial snapshot:
```

    ```sql
    SELECT bool_and(snapshot_committed)
    FROM mz_internal.mz_source_statistics
    WHERE id = '<source_ID>';
    ```
    <p></p>

>     ```noftm

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    ```nofmt
```

     snapshot_committed
    --------------------
     t
    (1 row)
    ```

    Once `snapshot_commited` is `t`, move on to the next step. Snapshotting can take between a few minutes to several hours, depending on the size of your dataset and the size of the cluster replica you chose for your `ingest_rds_postgres` cluster.

## Step 7. Right-size the cluster

> After the snapshotting phase, Materialize starts ingesting change events from the PostgreSQL replication stream. For this work, Materialize generally performs well with an `xsmall` replica, so in this step, you'll resize the replica in your source cluster.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After the snapshotting phase, Materialize starts ingesting change events from the PostgreSQL replication stream. For this work, Materialize generally performs well with an `xsmall` replica, so you can resize the replica in your source cluster.
```

1. Still in the `psql` shell connected to Materialize, remove the `medium` replica from the source cluster:

    ```sql
    DROP CLUSTER REPLICA ingest_rds_postgres.r1;
    ```

1. Add an `xsmall` replica to the source cluster:

    ```sql
    CREATE CLUSTER REPLICA ingest_rds_postgres.r1 SIZE 'xsmall';
    ```

1. Use the [`SHOW CLUSTER REPLICAS`](/sql/show-cluster-replicas/) command to check the status of the new replica:

    ```sql
    SHOW CLUSTER REPLICAS WHERE cluster = 'ingest_rds_postgres';
    ```
    <p></p>

>     ```noftm

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    ```nofmt
```

           cluster       | replica |  size  | ready
    ---------------------+---------+--------+-------
     ingest_rds_postgres | r1      | xsmall | t
    (1 row)
    ```

> 1. Going forward, you can use the [`mz_source_statistics`](/sql/system-catalog/mz_internal/#mz_source_statistics) table to verify that your new replica size is sufficient for Materialize to keep up with the change events coming through the replication stream:

Reviewer 4: RDS has a metric for this called "Oldest Replication Slot Lag" which is exactly what we want-- @bobbyiliev can you help Jesse give folks instructions on how to find this, as you've shown in https://github.com/MaterializeInc/materialize/issues/19142 ?

    ```sql
    SELECT
      SUM(updates_staged) AS updates_staged,
      SUM(updates_committed) AS updates_committed
    FROM mz_internal.mz_source_statistics
    WHERE id = '<source_ID>';
    ```

    <p></p>

    ```nofmt
     updates_staged | updates_committed
    ----------------+-------------------
                  0 |                 0
    (1 row)
    ```

>     A large gap between `updates_staged` and `updates_committed` is usually an indication that the source has fallen behind and that you might need to scale up your source.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    A large gap between `updates_staged` and `updates_committed` is usually an indication that the source has fallen behind and that you might need to scale up your ingestion cluster.
```

## Next steps

With Materialize ingesting your PostgreSQL data into durable storage, you can start exploring the data, computing real-time results that stay up-to-date as new data arrives, and serving results in various ways.

> - Explore

Reviewer 4: Just my two cents but this is an overwhelming number of choices; if you had metrics on a page like this, I bet you'd drive more engagement with one or two choice links

Author: Stripping it down somewhat.

> With Materialize ingesting your PostgreSQL data into durable storage, you can start exploring the data, computing real-time results that stay up-to-date as new data arrives, and serving results in various ways.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With Materialize ingesting your PostgreSQL data into durable storage, you can start exploring the data, computing real-time results that stay up-to-date as new data arrives, and serving results efficiently.
```

  - Use [`SHOW SOURCES`](/sql/show-sources) to view the subsources in Materialize that map to tables from your PostgreSQL publication.
  - Use [`SELECT`](/sql/select/) to explore these subsources just like you would regular tables in PostgreSQL.
- Transform
  - Once you have a query that you want Materialize to answer, use [`CREATE VIEW`](/sql/create-view/) to create an alias for the query and then [`CREATE INDEX`](/sql/create-index/) to have Materialize pre-compute the results in memory for fast retrieval.
  - One thing to note about indexes is that they exist only in the cluster where they are created. When you want results to be accessible from multiple clusters, use [`CREATE MATERIALIZED VIEW`](/sql/create-materialized-view/) to persist pre-computed results to durable storage that is accessible across clusters.

> - Serve

Author: Done.

  - Use [`SELECT`](/sql/select/) to pull results from Materialize.
  - Use [`SUBSCRIBE`](/sql/subscribe/) to push changes in results to a PostgreSQL-compatible SQL client or driver.

>   - Use [`CREATE SINK`](/sql/create-sink/) to push results to an external message broker.

Reviewer 3: Maybe a "Next Steps" link at the bottom here to point them at our general docs?

Reviewer 4: I don't think linking to the docs home page from within the docs is very helpful; these are all the kinds of next steps one might take. If anything, I'd suggest trimming them down a bit to help users take a focused next action like creating a view over their data, but I digress.

Author: Yeah, if we had a landing page for explore, transform, and serve, that's where I'd send people. Hope to have that before too much longer. For now, I'll just trim down somewhat.
